The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is world building.
Let's define what world building is.
First, I'd have to say that the author has to build a world starting probably from what type of star it orbits around.
Not many authors go to that much trouble though.
They may mention the star, the particular kind of system a planet is in, but in the past it's usually been the practice that an author will, if he's interested in adventure, in alien contact, in simply exploration, he'll have his people end up on a planet,
he'll have his adventures take place, his battles, his discoveries, whatever.
But not much will be given to the planet, what kind of a planet it is, what kind of a world it is, how it's different from Earth.
And many times in that kind of story, the world, the other planets discovered will simply be similar to Earth, or the author won't explain why or how they are different.
Yeah, in a world building type novel, the important, one of the important things is why the world is different and how that benefits the story.
Right, and an author can end up accidentally making mistakes.
If he doesn't do the research to back up what kind of world he has, he may mention something that is physically impossible.
And this gets into what Hal Clement calls the game in seeing how precise he can make his world and how well he can make it fit to what are presently known physical laws.
And the reader of course tries to pick out any mistakes that he may have made in the process.
Hal Clement, you mentioned his use of the term game applied to world building.
In one of his essays, I think he actually challenged the reader.
He said, in essence, he said, okay, I've written my story.
I've done it as scientifically true as I could.
It's up to you to see if I've made any mistakes.
Right, I think that article appeared in the astounding science fiction in 1953.
It was added on as an addendum to his book, Mission of Gravity.
And it does deal with that particular novel in the world of Mesclon, which has got to be one of the most incredible world-built worlds ever written for science fiction.
At the end of that, he says something like, I couldn't possibly think of all of these things in advance, all of the different, he's talking about all the different criteria of the planet.
Time and time again, a section of the story had to be rewritten because I suddenly realized that things couldn't happen that way.
I must have missed details, of course, and that's where your chance to win the game comes in.
Music
Paul Anderson has also written many of his books with the techniques of a world-builder, and he's written articles on it also.
And I think that he shares Campbell's interest and Clement's interest too in realism.
Paul Anderson, I think, emphasizes that this is something that's just for fun.
I think he said once that planet building is one of the joyous arts, if you have that sort of mind.
He said the object is to construct a strange world which is at the same time wholly consistent, not only with itself, but with what science knows of such matters.
Yeah, it also takes a very serious approach, I think, to science fiction.
You have to be interested in realism, first of all, to be a world-building author.
You also have to have some scientific background.
Perhaps it doesn't have to be as extensive as a science teacher or a true scientist would have, but you still have to know what you're talking about, for instance, in constructing a sun.
What brightness is a sun going to be? What classification?
An F-type star, like, or an F or a G? I think this, our sun is a G-type star.
With that kind of intensity, what sort of planets would be revolving around that sun?
Given a certain amount of metals or minerals on the planet, certain types of minerals or metals, what would be the mass, the density of the planet, the gravity, what kind of flora, fauna?
It sounds rather restrictive, but really there's a lot of latitude there that an author can use to change up his stories and give a lot of different backgrounds.
Anderson remarked that a science fiction author who's interested in world-building can feel like a god or a creator, and I think that's true almost in a literal sense, because he can say, let there be light, and imagine or create a particular kind of sun.
And then from there, you can go on, create the planet, create the circumstances of the planet, the beings on it, create a culture, anything he wants to. It's a very god-like procedure.
I think he also said that it might be good therapy for the kind of mental patient who thinks he's a god.
Yes, but I think there's a value to a reader with a world-built novel, too. A solid one, I think, can be an educational and refreshing experience for its reader.
We tend to think of man as the center of the universe, the most important creature in existence, of our world as the center of creation.
And science fiction authors have gotten into the rut of making other worlds similar to Earth, but they must be different.
They would certainly have different suns, different mineralization, different kinds of flora and fauna, and they wouldn't be similar to Earth at all.
But an author who carefully constructs a different and consistent world can cause us to see ourselves differently.
We are not unique. We're not the only life form, not the only world possible.
And when we see a well-done world-built novel, we realize that things out there are going to be different, and it might give us a sense of humility, a freshness, a sense of wonder.
I think that's probably the greatest value of science fiction.
But an author has to do that well. I think that any science fiction author who writes of other worlds is, in a sense, world-building.
But what we're talking about here is a degree to which he does it.
He has to do it seriously and consistently, and with a type of depth that will make a difference in the story.
There has to be a reason for the kinds of details that he constructs or makes his world from.
Yes, and in fact, we have a situation here where this kind of science fiction writer is subject to the old rule of the more that you can control,
the more you must control.
And so it is his responsibility to make sure that all of his details are as correct as he can make them in order to make the story more realistic.
And I would say that they all have to contribute something to the story.
They can be there simply for realistic purposes, yes.
But I think they also should have some kind of contributing effect to the story itself.
One well-known science fiction author who uses world-building to a fairly large extent in his work is Frank Herbert.
The book Dune, of course, is one of the greatest of all science fiction novels.
Basically, he makes his world of Arrakis a desert planet, and the lack of water is probably the most important thing that the people on the world, the humans have to deal with.
There's an ecology theme in the work.
But the novel really revolves around the fact that you're on a desert planet, so the world-building there would be of some importance.
Anne McCaffrey also uses world-building in the extent that forces on her world of Pern are governed by the solar system in which it's located.
When the planet Pern comes in close contact with its sister planet, called the Red Star, a spore-like creature passes from the Red Star to the planet and wreaks havoc upon the planet's surface.
And then you could say that she uses a world-building concept in the entire solar system in which this story takes place.
Paul Anderson is very serious about the world-building business.
He's written an article entitled The Creation of Imaginary Worlds, The World Builders Handbook and Pocket Companion.
He's followed the precepts in that article with his first world-built novel, his first attempt at it.
The original title of the work was War of the Wingmen. It was later reissued as The Man Who Counts.
He wrote it really as The Man Who Counts. It was published under that unfortunate title.
And later on, as he became more sophisticated and well-known, they republished it with the correct title, Man Who Counts.
It's the first time that we meet the character Nicholas Van Rijn.
And the planet, of course, that he writes about in that novel is called Diomedes.
And it has one startling creature on it, I guess, startling to us anyhow.
These creatures are almost the size of men, and they can fly. They have wings.
Now, this would be impossible on Earth. This is an example of the world builder doing his homework.
On Earth or any kind of planet that would have our gravitational pull, there's a certain size limit beyond which a creature could not fly, would not have wings.
So on this Earth, a winged creature, say much larger than an albatross or a condor, would be almost impossible.
But on Diomedes, Anderson is so carefully constructed that world that these intelligent creatures can fly.
This is one of Anderson's forte, I think, is flying intelligent creatures.
These would apparently be rare in the universe, and they're rarely done in science fiction.
But Anderson handles this several different times in different ways.
On Diomedes, one of the ways he can allow this to happen is that the world has no metals on it.
Its mass is about the same as Earth's, but the lack of metals cause it to be much lighter, less dense.
The atmosphere, the composition of the gases in the atmosphere is such that the air is denser.
And therefore, these Diomedians, these winged creatures, are able to use their huge wings to fly.
And their whole culture is determined by their world, the planet that they're on.
For instance, the fact that they have no metal causes these flying beings to have a stone age technology.
They can't manufacture any kind of technology based on metals.
The tilt of the axis of Diomedes is almost 90 degrees. The poles would be on an elliptical plane.
And this causes huge polar caps.
And strange seasonal, or at least seasonal fluctuations would be strange to us.
This causes these creatures to have to migrate.
The seasonal changes cause them to migrate to bear their young and so forth.
And the whole culture, Anderson, has very cleverly worked it out.
Whereby their way of life is based upon the world they live on.
In the story, the man who counts, as we mentioned, we see Nicholas Van Rijn for the first time.
He's one of the leading traders of the Polysac Technic League.
And he is stranded on this planet. They've come to investigate it for potential trade purposes.
And they become stranded. Their spaceship has crashed on the surface of the planet, in the ocean.
The crew has very little hope of survival of getting off the planet.
If it weren't for the wiles and the cunning of Nicholas Van Rijn, they wouldn't have.
Nicholas has no qualms about causing a war between different factions of the wing creatures
to facilitate his removal from the planet.
And he proceeds to do so with quite a bit of ingenuity and intentional humor also.
I think in that book Anderson is definitely not obtrusive with his world-building statistics.
Authors can sometimes be obtrusive, go a little too far in giving you numbers and statistical information.
You can get in the way of the story.
But this is in the background. It's there, it's helpful. In fact, Nicholas Van Rijn uses his knowledge of these people.
Their physiological makeup, the way they base their culture on the planet itself to achieve his ends.
But Anderson was involved in another project, which I think was not quite as successful as this novel.
He wrote a book entitled A World Named Cleopatra.
And it's probably one of the deepest and most thorough attempts at world-building that I've ever read.
The setup itself was very interesting.
The book consists of four long short stories by different authors.
They all take place on a planet called Cleopatra at different times in its history.
And at the beginning of the book there's an essay by Anderson in which he sets up the characteristics of the planet.
He tells you what kind of planetary system it's in, the type of sun.
It happens to be an F7 type sun.
The statistics on the planet, the biology, the plants, the animals, the kinds of satellites around it, everything.
In very great detail, about a 15-page article.
And then he sort of says, go to it.
You know, you authors write your stories based upon these statistics that I've given to you.
Anderson himself writes the first story, and I think that probably is the best one.
He chronicles the adventures of the original landing party from Earth, a group of scouts who found this planet, Cleopatra, two men and a woman.
The conflict among them is, are they going to develop this planet?
They treat it as a fresh, uninhabited Eden-like planet.
Biologically, it's similar to Earth in the Mesozoic period, way back in the prehistoric days.
And their conflict is, are we going to open it up? Are we going to destroy it?
There doesn't seem to be any intelligent life on it yet, although there's one creature vaguely humanoid who seems to be making tools.
But the basic conflict of that first story by Anderson was simply, we have a world here like Eden, are we going to change it?
Are we going to do anything with it?
The other three stories in the volume, one by Michael Orgill, one by Jack Dannon, another by George Zabrowski.
I didn't think they were that successful.
They pick up on Anderson's statistics, the way he's constructed the world.
They base their stories on the data that he's given them.
But I don't think they reach the level of writing that you'd expect from a good, world-built novel.
I think Anderson had a much better feel for the world that he created than the other authors who wrote about it.
That may have been the problem.
A world-built novel can't rely on just the world to pull it through.
It has to have a good story.
And really the story should come first in terms of what's written down for the reader to read.
The world can be a valuable asset to creating a realistic and believable background.
But of course the story comes first.
This I think was brought out in an article by George R. R. Martin that was written for the Science Fiction Writers Association.
And he mentioned some of the works of Hal Clement and others as possibly the world that was built getting in the way of the story.
And that this might be a negative thing in the aspects of world-building.
One thing he mentioned was that world-builders are like artists who spend years designing frames and then hurriedly paint a picture to put in them.
Sometimes it works, but not often enough to justify the procedure.
Whether or not we agree with that, that is a valid thing to consider if someone is going to write a world-built novel.
I think he's got a good point in the fact that sometimes when authors do write a story with world-building as a precept,
they tend to make the world one of the main characters in the story rather than simply the background in which the story takes place.
That it sort of overshadows the plot or the aliens or the inhabitants of the world sometimes.
That's his opinion, of course.
I enjoy Clement's main work, The Mission of Gravity, the one that he's basically talking about in this article.
Clement himself is a teacher of science, I guess you could call him a scientist,
and he's gone to great pains to make this world believable.
His planet, Mesclan, is to an earthman a very strange world.
It's not round, it's oblate, shaped more or less like an egg, and it spins very rapidly.
The gravity at the poles is so intense that an earthman of average size would weigh 60 tons.
At the equator, he probably would weigh about three times his normal earth weight.
And of course, The Mission of Gravity as the title indicates, gravity is the overwhelming force of the novel,
and the major characteristic of the planet that the earthman have to deal with.
But Clement has, I think he's had fun trying to imagine and create the kind of intelligent life that could live on a planet with gravity so intense.
And he's done that with the mesclanites, who are caterpillar-like creatures,
probably about 15 inches long with pinchers.
The culture that he's given them, the way of life, everything about them I think is extremely realistic, and they're very interesting aliens.
I think in some respects that he's taken these aliens and he's taken just earthmen and earth-type traits and put them in an alien costume.
I think this is one of the things that Martin suggested about the novel,
is that the aliens were not really realistic, that they were not alien, they were human.
But on the other hand, he's gone to a lot of trouble Clement has in making those aliens psychologically different.
For instance, they don't have any buildings because they are extremely afraid of something falling on them.
All they do, if they want any kind of cover at all, they'll put a piece of cloth, no more than two inches off the ground above them,
because they're afraid of things falling.
Probably a six inch fall would kill them.
They have never seen anything thrown, you know, launched from an arm or a hand, this is alien to them.
And when they see something thrown by an earthman for the first time, it astounds them.
Now that kind of psychology is tremendously different than what an earthman would have.
And I think that makes the aliens, among other things, very realistic.
Also, if you recall the first time that the earthman, I think Lackland was his name, the one who lands on the planet,
he stays in his lander because of the gravity.
But one time he had to lift one of the mescalonites, Barlonon.
It's the first time that Barlonon had ever been lifted, been off the ground.
And he almost went mad, he almost went insane.
In fact, the other creatures, I think, almost attacked the earthman because they thought that he had killed their captain.
So to me that's an example of creating a different creature, an alien,
one who thinks differently, whose psychology is totally different.
And I think it's consistent with the kind of strange atmosphere, at least strange to an earthman,
that Clement has set up on that world.
If you remember also, there's no water on this planet.
The seas are methane.
The planet spins so rapidly that the days are only 17 minutes or 17 and a half minutes long.
And the basic plot of the novel, I think, is an interesting one.
The basic plot of the novel, not to elaborate too much, is that the earthmen are having the mescalonites
explore the planet for heavy metals, and the mescalonites are trying to obtain some of the earthmen's high technology.
And they eventually come to a compromise in that the mescalonites are going to be providing some of the raw materials
that the earthmen need and the earthmen are going to be providing the advanced technology that the mescalonites are striving for.
One interesting thing I think that Clement did here is that he based this particular planet on a real star system.
Some authors make up their own stars and some authors use a real star system.
In this case, I think he chose a 61-signi, and at the time that he wrote this, there was a question as to whether there might be a dark body,
which could or could not be a planet circling around this star.
If it was a planet, it would have to be very dense, and so he took it from there and created the planet mescalonite.
I think it's probably ultimately up to the particular reader as to whether he thinks the planet obtrudes into the story.
You know, if Clement goes too far with it.
But I thought there was a good plot to it. There's adventure.
We see most of it from the point of view of Barlin and the native mescalonite, this caterpillar-like creature.
And his job is a very difficult one. It's fraught with danger.
He has to be a courageous, heroic being to do what he has to do in that novel.
And I think Clement has given us a feel of what it would be like to be on a planet with such tremendous gravity,
the difficulties that would occur, the things that have to be done to survive, to exist, to fulfill a task that he has to fulfill.
I believed. I didn't think the statistics or the data got in the way of the story at all.
Another novel we might consider in the category of world building would be Larry Niven's famous novel Ring World.
Here we have an artificial world that's been created by Larry Niven.
It's a very unusual world. I don't think anything has ever really been written quite like it.
It's completely non-natural. The entire structure where these creatures lived at one time, and some of them still do, at the time of the novel,
was created from the raw materials of the solar system that once existed around this particular star.
I think in that novel Ring World, a picky person might question whether it's a world-built novel in the sense that Anderson and Clement conceive of one.
Niven is more of an engineer, I think, in the book rather than a creator.
As you said, it's not a natural world. It is complete unto itself, and the creatures on it are what tied into the ecology and the way the world has been set up.
But I'm not sure I'd call it a world-built novel in the sense that it was a natural thing.
I think some people might argue with you on that point.
Really, a world-building novel, the term world-building, I think comes from the author's point of view rather than whether the world itself is really a natural one or not.
I think Niven has created a world here. It is an entire ecosystem, something that these creatures were going to depend on for all of their existence in a physical sense.
He created this thing as an entire habitat circling a star just as a planet would be.
In fact, Larry Niven himself is caught up in this same game that how Clement's been talking about that he made some mistakes, even physics mistakes,
concerning the world that he built that some of the readers caught him on.
And in his sequel to the novel, The Ring World Engineers, he worked out solutions to some of these problems.
I might give you a brief description of what The Ring World is actually like.
The Ring World is a giant band, a ring around a sun, the distance between the sun and the ring being that approximate distance between the earth and the sun.
The ring has mountains along the inside about a thousand miles high on each side to contain the atmosphere, set the ring rotating about 770 miles an hour,
and it creates a gravity on the inside of the ring of about one G, populated with various animals and peoples.
And you have an environment with about three trillion times the surface area of the earth.
With this expansive environment, Niven could postulate several different kinds of stories to take place on The Ring World.
Especially one that is no longer as organized as it once was when it was built.
It was obviously very well organized in order to be built at all.
But now the engineers who built The Ring World are no longer there apparently, and everything has fallen into a state of disorder.
There are many mutations and many things that have gone wrong all over the different areas of The Ring, which of course gives a great lot of source material for adventurous stories.
As long as we're talking about the artificial type of world building, I think we should at least mention a book by almost a brand new science fiction author, John Barley.
The book is called Titan.
The title Titan comes from the, I guess you'd call it the main character of the book.
It happens to be an artificially constructed planet.
It's contacted and entered by an earth crew scouting for life in the solar system.
And they find out that this planet has been made.
It looks natural. It's got soil. It's got trees, many cultures, oceans, continents, different kinds of flowers, different kinds of creatures.
And at first they don't realize that it's artificial, but the planet itself is alive.
There's a sentience, a creature behind it who is making things happen, who is creating things on that planet.
And it's a very interesting approach, I think, to, you might even call it halfway between an artificially built world and a naturally built one.
The final novel that we'll consider as a world built book will be the novel Big Planet by Jack Vance.
But Big Planet's an adventure story. It has good guys, bad guys, fair maidens, heroism, human enemies, monsters, all sorts of things.
But the core of the plot is a journey across the planet.
40,000 miles, this group of earth people have to go to save themselves.
And their enemies are out to stop them.
Now the planet is called Big Planet for a reason. It has two qualities of significance.
The first being that it is big. It's huge, and this affects the novel in a lot of ways.
The mountains, the plains, the rivers, everything is on a huge scale.
Secondly, there is absolutely no metal on the planet. There is no technology there for.
The inhabitants cannot use anything that would be made from metal. They have to depend upon wood, leather, stone, and so forth.
Now the gravity of the planet is very close to earth gravity because of the lack of metals.
Even though the planet is huge, the gravity is close to earth because of this fact.
And I think probably the hallmark of the novel is the ingenuity of Vance in detailing the culture of a planet of that size without any metals.
How would people achieve any kind of civilization without metal?
How would they progress? How would they build?
And he does that with great delicacy, great depth and sophistication, I think.
For instance, to travel. They've erected this huge monoline system of towers from mountain peaks to plains all over the planet with monolines, filaments between the towers.
And they can travel over these lines in aerial carriages with sails on them.
And they're able to cross great distances with this.
But it's always a pleasure to read a book by Vance because he does such a fine job in detailing alien cultures, their way of life, their differentness from earth.
And I think Big Planet would very definitely qualify as one of the better world-built books.
This is David Cruz.
Darrell Lane.
And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.